# Mechanisms of Reading

[Hochuli](https://hyphenpress.co.uk/products/books/978-0-907259-34-3) (2005, p.7) comments that while the science of macro-typography mostly deals with matters of layout and information hierarchy, detail typography covers the most important technical details of letter-spacing and words. The first hold a great deal of style and aesthetic statement, the latter is more functional and serves the sole function of increasing both legibility and readability of body text. It is the mission of the typographer to master both aspects of the trade and insure that the balance between the harmony of the blocks of the type, and the micro setting of the elements is kept.

As the experienced reader tracks though the letters and words, their eyes jump across the lines. These brief movements are known as saccades and their duration varies between 0.2- 0.4 seconds. A line is perceived in a series of saccades followed by a long one, the end of the line. Then the reader’s eye reverts to the left, looking for a new line. Information is only absorbed within the fixed saccade period and any data to be after that is likely to be missed. With average body text size of 12 points such an interval would normally include 5–10 letters and 1–2 words. If the reader cannot make sense the text presented read then the eye jumps back, in an action that is professional referred to as regression saccades.

In the space of the 10 letters only 3–4 letters are focused on by the readers and the rest are guessed according to the connotation of the sentence. When we learn to read the saccades are fairly short and the reading process is time-consuming. As we gain experience in the action of reading we train the eye to engage in longer saccades, over shorter duration of time.

The size and frequency of saccades within a piece of type are dependent of the many different variables that micro-typography deals with and are in effect the absolute measurement of a set type readability. The more correct a setting of type would be, the more pleasant the reading process would be, the measurable presence of that would be the length of the saccade.
